gh to serve another client. Instead of sending this
vehicle back to the depot with a positive remaining capacity, it may be beneﬁcial to empty
the vehicle by visiting a ﬁnal client before sending another vehicle to complete, either totally
or partially, the delivery. In the airport context, this is the usual technique. Following our
approach, a split delivery can only occur when the remaining capacity is not large enough to
serve an attractive client. This covers the basic case where the vehicle capacities are smaller
than the demands. However, it excludes a split delivery between vehicles which would have
been able to fully serve a client on their own. This last strategy is rarely optimal due to
the travel costs and the ﬁxed amount of time required for any service. Moreover, several
vehicles may be banned from serving the same client simultaneously. Such operations are
often prevented by infrastructure constraints such as a limited number of unloading docks
or an aircraft with one tank and one main inlet.
Our problem is a multi-trip VRP. The planning horizon may be extremely long, or even
inﬁnite, while at the same time the ﬂeet size is limited. The same vehicle must be allowed
to replenish to start a new tour afterward, if needed. Each time a vehicle comes back to
the depot, we automatically load it again at full capacity. The time required for reloading
vehicle k follows a scheme similar to the one for serving the clients : ok
D = ck
D + vk
D(Ck −rk).
Speciﬁc constant and variable times, ck
D and vk
D, are allowed for the depot. The quantity to
load is the diﬀerence between the full capacity Ck and the remaining capacity rk at the end
of the previous tour. As soon as the replenishment is complete, the vehicle is again available.
Note that this multi-trip possibility also implies that a split delivery could be performed by
a single vehicle.
Finally, we consider a stochastic dynamic environment. Many companies operate con-
tinuously seven days a week. It is therefore not possible to precisely determine the end or
the beginning of the planning horizon. Moreover, the world is uncertain: delivery quanti-
ties might only be based on expectations and time windows may be shifted; ﬂights could
be delayed or canceled due to the weather or a breakdown. In Dynamic Vehicle Routing
Problems, new events and new information can be integrated into the process. We are able
to respond to any change of the data at any moment: client cancellation, new time windows,
new quantities to deliver, new clients, lateness or breakdown of a vehicle, new incompatibil-
ity lists and new locations of the clients or of the vehicles. As in Gendreau et al. (1999), our
strategy is to reconsider the plan each time new information is available.
To address this dynamic context, some additional assumptions must be made. First, as
5


=== PAGE 6 ===
in Gendreau et al. (1999), we assume that a driver may accept a new instruction only when
he has completed the previous operation. Second, while all the vehicles start initially from
the depot, they can be anywhere at the time of a new optimization. Each client location, not
only the depot, could become the starting point of the updated route. Finally, the routes
are closed loops. When we start the optimization of a new plan we consider that the ﬁnal
operation of a vehicle is to return to the depot. This could be suboptimal in a dynamic
context.
Indeed, imagine that in the current planning a vehicle is serving a ﬁnal client
i before returning to the depot with a large remaining capacity. If a new order appears
immediately afterwards for a client in the vicinity of i, then going back to the depot in
between was an erroneous decision. Instead, we could have considered open routes ending
with clients instead of the depot. In this case, the vehicles wait at client locations for new
orders. This approach also has drawbacks since it could be optimal to immediately return to
the depot at each period of inactivity to replenish and to be again available to operate large
tours. The optimal location or relocation of vehicles during the inactivity period is itself
another separate research question and is not developed here. We believe that the closed
routes approach is more realistic and will adhere to it.
An important question to address concerns the existence of a feasible solution, especially
in a dynamic context. In our multi-trip framework and under a weak assumption guarantying
the existence of at least one compatible truck for each client, the sole critical constraints
are the time windows.
Three main scenarios can be considered to ﬁx this problem.
In
the ﬁrst one, the total demand is predictable and stable, and the size of the ﬂeet is initially
determined to match any peak of demand. Agreements may also exist with other transporters
to temporarily extend the size of the ﬂeet, if needed. In the second case, the decision process
implies that the ﬁrm must decide which orders to accept and which orders to reject before
starting the optimization of the tours. Some authors have studied the feasibility of families
of VRPs in the dynamic context and propose mechanisms to identify the orders to reject
(see, e.g., Berbeglia et al., 2010, 2011, 2012). In the last scenario, we consider soft windows
where penalties proportional to the violations are added to the cost function in order to
minimize it.
The starting point of this work is a problem submitted by an airport. In this context, as
in many other ones, the demand is predictable and the ﬂeet size is typically large enough.
Moreover, rejecting an order is not an option, there is only one service provider and each
ﬂight must be served. We therefore focus in this work on the ﬁrst scenario. Note however
that the soft time windows approach is extremely easy to implement when the criterion to
optimize is responsiveness. Indeed, in a basic scheme, we only need to ignore the upper
bounds of the time windows since the deﬁnition of responsiveness implies that any late
completion of service, within or outside the time windows, costs more. This approach has
nevertheless the disadvantage to drastically increase the size of the solution space. Note also
that our dynamic approach allows us to adjust the hard time windows based on the actual
conditions (even if it is likely to induce a penalty for the company) when no feasible solutions
exist.
4
The ACS algorithm for the VRPTW
Ant colony algorithms are inspired by the collaborative behavior of ants in real life. The
ants wander randomly when looking for food but they are attracted to a substance, called
6


=== PAGE 7 ===
pheromone, left by other ants. Pheromone is generated by the ants on their way back to
the colony after reaching food. When several ants use a path to reach food, pheromone
levels increase up and a path becomes more and more attractive to other ants. However,
pheromone evaporates with time. As it takes a longer period of time to travel along a long
path, the intensity of pheromone is lower than for a shorter path. This mechanism has the
double advantage of favoring shorter paths and reducing the attraction to local optima.
We ﬁrst brieﬂy recall the basic ant colony algorithm for the classical VRPTW with one
vehicle and a distance minimization objective. A route is constructed iteratively by moving
one ant, namely the vehicle, from one client to the next one. A route starts from the depot,
must serve all clients, and comes back to the depot. A typical criterion is the minimization of
the total distance (or of the travel time as a function of the distance). Starting from client i,
the next client j is probabilistically selected in the set of clients reachable from client i. This
set is denoted Ni . For the VRPTW, a client belongs to Ni if it has not yet been visited, if
the remaining vehicle capacity is large enough to serve it and if the vehicle can arrive before
the end of the time window. This deﬁnition is extended later for the DVRPTWSD. Two
measure