 Feasible path for ant 1
74 for completing Flight 3’s delivery, signiﬁcantly increasing the ﬁnal responsiveness (125).
Ants number three through six consider anticipated returns to the depot. These solutions
appear less natural and are indeed not beneﬁcial, at least for this example.
All other sequences of visits are eluded by the ant optimization process. Indeed, the
neighborhood deﬁnitions prevent such paths. Three cases are illustrated in Figure 2 by the
ants 7, 8 and 9. Ant 7 attempts to start with Truck 1. Visiting Flight 1 after leaving D1 is
rejected since this aircraft, a B777, is incompatible with Truck 1. Ant 8 illustrates a violation
of a time window. It is not possible to visit Flight 3 after replenishing Truck 1 since Truck
1 would not be able to complete the operation before time 99.5, i.e. after the end of the
time window (90). Ant 9 illustrates a problem of insuﬃcient capacity. No ﬂight is in the
neighborhood of Flight 1 for Truck 2 since its remaining capacity is ﬁve units of fuel at this
time, which is less than the minimal allowed quantity for a split delivery and less than what
is required by the other ﬂights (10 and 15).
Another important insight from this illustration is that optimizing responsiveness or
distance does not lead to equivalent solutions. The path for the most responsive solution (Ant
1) is longer (37 units) than the shortest solution (36 units). Conversely, the responsiveness
for the shortest solution (116.5 units of time) is far less attractive than the most responsive
solution (97). Note also that the shortest path would not have been encountered without
allowing trucks to return in advance to the depot (d0 > 0).
5.8
Back to the distance criterion
Considering responsiveness instead of distance is of critical importance in many applications.
Thus, the focus of this work is on responsiveness. Minimizing the length of routes obviously
remains an attractive question in many other contexts. It is also scientiﬁcally interesting
to compare routes obtained with these two diﬀerent objectives.
While Algorithm 1 was
developed with a responsiveness criterion in mind, it can easily be adapted to use the distance
criterion instead,; going back to the procedures deﬁned in Section 4 for the objective and the
closeness measure. The implementation of all the other constraints remains valid. Primarily,
the closeness measure must be replaced based on the distance (line 13), each Ni \{D} by Ni
(lines 11 and 16) and the probabilistic return to the depot (line 14) suppressed. Finally, R
has to be replaced by T. In the results section, the two versions are executed on benchmarks
found in the literature in order to compare the responsive routes with the shortest ones.
15


=== PAGE 16 ===
6
Initialization and improvements
We discuss here how to initialize the ACS and, as a side eﬀect, how to get some benchmarks
for the responsiveness criterion. We also present some methods to improve the solutions
provided by the ants.
6.1
Initial solutions
A ﬁrst feasible solution is required to initialize τ0. A classical approach is to use a nearest
neighbor heuristic. A sequence of visits is constructed one at a time for each vehicle. In the
sequence, the nearest client of i in the feasible neighborhood Ni is selected. Ni is deﬁned
as in the ant colony algorithm and therefore takes into account all the dimensions of the
problem. The nearest client is deﬁned as the one for which the client responsiveness is the
smallest. If two clients have the same responsiveness, the tie is broken by minimizing the
distance. When we replace the objective of responsiveness by a traditional criterion, the
nearest client remains the closest one.
This ﬁrst heuristic does not adequately suit a responsiveness criterion. In practice, dis-
patchers in airports use another basic approach, simply serveing the clients by order of
arrival. The main loop is therefore no longer on the vehicles, but on the clients. Within
the pool of vehicles available and compatible at the start of a client time window, we select
the one which is idle for the longest time. This heuristic, named FIFO for First In First
Out, may serve as a tool to identify an initial feasible solution and to compute τ0, but it is
also a benchmark with which to compare our results to standard practice. Note that this
benchmark assumes, in the dynamic case, that the vehicle starts to move to reach a client i
only after ai since a dispatcher typically waits until the start of the time window for all the
latest information. It therefore implies that the client will always have to wait, at least for
the travel time. In a deterministic case and to better take into account the heterogeneity of
the ﬂeet, a variation of this heuristic allows the vehicle to start to the client as soon as the
vehicle is available, and the preferred vehicle is the one which incurs the smallest responsive-
ness for the client. This variant, denoted FIFO2, is used to compute the initial solution. If
we want to replace the responsiveness criterion with a more traditional minimization of the
distance, the same heuristic remains valid. The preferred vehicle for a client simply becomes
the nearest one. One additional approach is sometimes considered in practice. The dispatch-
ers initially plan the journey deterministically as in the FIFO approach. A list of clients is
then associated with each driver, but here he has to follow this list even if new events occur.
Along the course of the operating day and with the arrival of new information, each driver
adapts the plan using the FIFO heuristic but only considering his vehicle and his list of
clients. This second strategy is clearly less eﬃcient than the FIFO one but corresponds to
another reality of operations. Since it will always provide a larger value for the objective
function, we do not use it in the sequel.
6.2
Local searches
When an ant has completed its search (line 36 of Algorithm 1), the solution might be in-
complete. As suggested in Gambardella et al. (1999), the algorithm attempts to reconstruct
a local solution by inserting the remaining clients in the path . For each client, the best
insertion in the current tours is kept if such an insertion exists. Gambardella et al. (1999)
16


=== PAGE 17 ===
considers each client by decreasing demand. In our responsiveness and richer context, we ob-
tained better results by selecting the clients in a random order. Finally, to preserve the spirit
of the ant colony and to avoid spending too much time here, the insertion procedure is only
started when the ant provides a signiﬁcantly long solution (for our numerical experiments,
at least 75% of the clients must be visited by the ant before initiating insertions).
Even when the ant, with or without insertions, provides a local feasible optimum, it is well
known that performance can generally be improved by combining the ACS with local search
procedures (line 39). As suggested again in Gambardella et al. (1999), we developed a local
search basic heuristic based on CROSS exchanges (Taillard et al. (1997)). Such an operation
consists of permuting two sub-chains of clients belonging to two diﬀerent vehicles. One of the
sub-chains could be empty, leading to a more traditional insertion. Both sub-chains could
also end at the depot leading to a 2-opt edges exchange. In our na¨ıve algorithm, we only
apply a few CROSS exchanges such that it improves the objective each time. Each vehicle is
tested in a random order in conjunction with a second one. Since CROSS exchanges imply
two vehicles, we also tested a local search limited to one vehicle at a time. Each client is
successively moved to another position in the same tour. The best move, if any, is kept.
6.3
Pheromone conservation
As a ﬁnal improvement, we have included in the algorithm the pheromone conservation
procedure developed by Montemanni et al. (2005). The idea is to pass valuable information
from one optimization to the next one in the dynamic context