, the impact of intensifying the use of a same truck is not clear.
It has no signiﬁcant impact for this instance when responsiveness is the main criterion (case
F vs. case H), and it has a slightly negative impact when the criterion is distance (case K
vs. case L).
Table 2 provides more details with regard to the operational quality of the results in the
deterministic context for the responsiveness criterion. Case F provides a solution with an
objective value of only 9h03 in 30 seconds of CPU computation time. Very few new improved
solutions are found when the allocated CPU time increases. A similar result is obtained in
ﬁve minutes (case E). 9h00 is the best solution found (case C) but it requires one hour
of computation time. This solution is depicted in Figure 3. This is a strong performance
with respect to three benchmarks.
First, imagine that the airport applies a traditional
FIFO strategy (case A) as described in the previous section. The total responsiveness would
19


=== PAGE 20 ===
Figure 3: Optimal schedule (Case C)
amount for 11h33, meaning that the ACS approach is able to improve responsiveness by
22%. Second, if it was possible to apply the second strategy FIFO2, which is not realistic
in a dynamic context, FIFO2 would perform better than the FIFO strategy but would still
remain far less attractive at 10h00, than the ACS solution.
It shows that a very basic
heuristic can already provide an interesting solution with respect to the FIFO rule, at least
when the objective is responsiveness optimization, but also that an Ant Colony can still make
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Finally, we can investigate whether 9h00 is the global optimum.
Unfortunately we have no tool to prove this. We can still compute a lower bound. Assuming
that the fastest operating truck is able to serve an aircraft immediately without generating
idle time, then, based on the quantities to be delivered, it would require at least 6h30 of
operations (i.e. responsiveness). This corresponds to an average diﬀerence of ﬁve minutes
per aircraft in comparison with the best ACS solution. Note also that it is a very optimistic
lower bound since we made two strong assumptions that can clearly not be satisﬁed in this
context of intense demand.
Analyzing the performances of the ACS approach when the objective is to minimize the
distance rather than optimizing the responsiveness is also enlightening. Cases I to L indicate
that the ACS algorithm is able to ﬁnd good solutions with respect to this other criterion. The
best result with a distance of 17877m is obtained after one hour (case I). A very close result,
17968m, is already obtained after 30 seconds (case K). More interestingly, we can compare the
solutions when we use distance instead of responsiveness as the criterion. These two diﬀerent
objectives lead to drastically diﬀerent tours. Assuming that optimizing the responsiveness is
of crucial importance for some companies, minimizing the distance in the hope that a shorter
set of routes will imply a higher speed of service and a better responsiveness is erroneous.
In our case, the shortest tour (case I) is associated with a responsiveness of 16h03, which is
far inferior to the most responsive solution (case C: 9h00). Even the typical FIFO strategy
(case A) does better with 11h33. We also observe a large variation of the responsiveness
for solutions of approximately the same length, which in itself shows that responsiveness
is not directly linked to distance. When (tight) time windows exist, two elements explain
this diﬀerence. First, the time associated with a trip is no longer calculated as the distance
divided by the speed since the vehicles have to wait if they arrive in advance by a client.
Distance divided by speed is only a lower bound. Second, responsiveness time is also lower
than the time for the fastest tour since responsiveness is measured with respect to the start
of the client time window and not with respect to the time of departure from the previous
client; i.e. a subset of this last interval. Conversely, when optimizing the distance is of
crucial importance, optimizing the responsiveness is not an adequate strategy. It leads to
solutions 50% longer for this instance (17876m vs. 27253m) or as high as two times longer
20


=== PAGE 21 ===
if we compare with the FIFO strategy (35550m). When responsiveness is the criterion in
opposition to distance, we also observe that the aircrafts do not need to wait as long before
being served, and that there is a vast buﬀer period before planned departure. Moreover, the
average idle time per aircraft is reduced by a factor four when responsiveness is considered
instead of distance. This is an important and attractive operational result.
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
Objective:
Dist.
Dist.
Dist.
Dist.
Resp.
Resp.
Resp.
Algorithm:
ACS
ACS
ACS
ACS
FIFO
Oracle
ACS
Max CPU time :
1h
5’
30”
30”
-
1h
42x40”
Local searches:
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Back to depot:
-
-
-
-
-
Dynamic
Dynamic
Truck intensity:
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
Responsiveness:
16h03
13h44
13h44
14h24
11h03
8h038
8h59
Distance (m):
17876.8
17967.6
17967.6
18134.6
37068
27122
29268.1
Average idle time:
18’
13.4’
13.4’
14.7’
8’
3.4’
4’
Max idle time:
46.2’
41.9’
41.9’
45’
27.6’
25.4’
26’
Average safety time:
27.8’
32.5’
32.5’
31.1’
34’
38.6’
37.9’
Min safety time:
3.2’
4.9’
4.9’
3’
-4.3’
4’
3.4’
Table 3: Airport case: distance and dynamic contexts
The previous results only discuss the algorithm in a static context for which all the
information is known precisely in advance. With cases M, N and O, we now discuss the
performances of the approach in a stochastic environment. Throughout the operating day,
new events occur. The landing time and the beginning of each time window are not known
with certainty. To simulate this, we draw at random the beginning of each time windows
ai. We use a Gaussian probability distribution centered on the previously used expectation
time and with a standard deviation corresponding to ﬁfteen minutes. When the size of the
time windows after shifting its beginning becomes greater than one hour or smaller than 30
minutes, the (expected) end of the time window is adjusted to maintain a standard one hour
window for the operations. If the resulting ai is smaller than the previously expected time,
the dispatcher is informed ten minutes before ai. Otherwise, he gets the new information
at the initially expected time of arrival. The true quantities to deliver are communicated
precisely at the beginning of each (new) time window. They are computed thanks to a normal
distribution centered on the expected quantities and with a standard deviation corresponding
to 10% of the expected quantities. Finally, the service time is sometimes faster and sometimes
slower than expected by a value distributed once more according to a normal distribution
N(0,3). This information is made available during the service. All in all, in this simulation
scheme, new information appears at 42 diﬀerent moments during the operating day of the
30 ﬂights.
Case O provides the ﬁnal results obtained when a new optimization is performed each
time a new piece of information appears, leading to 42 runs. The shortest delay between the
arrival of two new pieces of information was one minute. Due to this level of granularity,
each new optimization was allowed to run for only a fraction of one minute, more precisely 40
seconds. This ensures real time operations. Thanks to our approach, it was always possible
to adapt the planning to serve all the ﬂights in time. We also observe that the results are
very good. To determine this, ﬁrst note that the average idle time is very low and the safety
time very large, which is attractive to the airports. The minimum safety time of only 3.4
21


=== PAGE 22 ===
minutes is linked to a sole ﬂight for which a truck experienced a very long unanticipated
breakdown. We can also compare the case O with the cases M and N. Case N corresponds
to the best known estimation of the solution for th