fter the
new information arrives. As stated in Giaglis et al. (2004), this approach is requested in
practice. While an initial planning minimizing the risk is necessary, we need methods to
respond to unforeseen events when they happen. It is only more recently that technology
has allowed consideration of such applications.
Indeed, real-time applications require a
powerful information system, such as systems based on GPS, to locate the vehicles and
to communicate with them.
Repeatedly computing new solutions also requires powerful
computers or systems of computers (parallel computing as in Ghiani et al., 2003) and state-
of-the art algorithms. In our framework, we accept and immediately react to any unexpected
events, without relying on probability distributions and without identifying beforehand sets
of possible future, as would be typically done in static stochastic approaches. The dynamic
dimension of our work was inspired by the work of Montemanni et al. (2005) and is adapted
to include the reoptimization strategy proposed by Gendreau et al. (1999). Our work also
departs from these two papers by the extensive list of constraints we consider. Moreover,
we believe that our third and main contribution is to propose a new objective criterion, i.e.
responsiveness, especially adapted in such dynamic contexts. To the best of our knowledge,
this approach is new and original.
State of the art methods to exactly solve VRPs are very complex. They typically rely
on branch-and-cut-and-price algorithms and route relaxations strategies (see Baldacci et al.,
2012). Richer and medium-sized problems generally remain intractable or too lengthy to
solve with exact methods.
In this context, the development of heuristics is the tradi-
tional and often only reasonable approach.
Many strategies are described in the liter-
ature (see, e.g., Archetti and Speranza, 2012; Br¨aysy and Gendreau, 2005; Laporte, 2009
for a description of methods and surveys). Tabu search is probably the most often cited
method, either alone or to expedite exact methods. Many authors also tackle VRP vari-
ants using ant colonies. Other papers rely on ad-hoc heuristics, adaptive large neighbor-
hood search or genetic algorithms. Our fourth contribution is to analyze the performances
of an Ant Colony System (ACS) approach. We selected this metaheuristic based on the
promising results described in the literature for the standard VPRTW (Gambardella et al.,
1999). Note that many of our developments could be adapted to other local search meth-
ods.
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), as explained in Dorigo et al. (1996), is inspired
by the collaborative behavior of naturally independent agents: ants. This algorithm has
been modiﬁed to solve many diﬀerent discrete optimization problems (Dorigo et al., 1999).
In particular, ACO was applied to graph optimization problems including the Traveling
3


=== PAGE 4 ===
Salesman Problem (Dorigo and Gambardella, 1997), which can be seen as a VRP with
only one vehicle.
This leads to the ACS, an improved version of the ACO. The ACO
algorithm is very ﬂexible, and other characteristics such as time dependency, uncertainty,
real-time conditions, backhauls, pickup and delivery, heterogeneous ﬂeet or other improve-
ments were introduced one at a time in the literature (Benslimane and Benadada, 2013;
Bin et al., 2009; Donati et al., 2008; Gajpal and Abad, 2009; Gambardella et al., 2003, 1999;
Montemanni et al., 2005; Reimann et al., 2004; Rizzoli et al., 2007). In this research, we took
inspiration from Gambardella et al. (1999) for the ant framework.
3
Problem description
We present an approach to dealing with a broad range of Dynamic Capacitated Vehicle
Routing Problems with Time Windows, (partial) Split Delivery and Heterogeneous ﬂeets
(DVRPTWSD). Formally, this problem can be represented by a digraph G = (N, A) where
N = {D, 1, . . . , n} is the set of nodes and A = {(i, j)|i, j ∈N, i ̸= j} is the set of arcs. The
nodes in N \ {D} denote the clients to serve and D represents the depot. For each customer
i in N \ {D}, we have a positive quantity qi to be delivered within a particular time window
[ai, bi]. This is a hard time window within which the service must be entirely completed. This
is a strong constraint justiﬁed by the huge penalties encountered by the companies when
these windows are not respected, such as in the context of the airports. Note, however,
that this constraint is essentially restrictive at the upper bound bi. As usually accepted for
VRPTW, a vehicle is allowed to arrive in advance but has to wait until the beginning of
the time windows to start the service. No penalty is incurred in this case. We consider a
single depot D from which each vehicle starts and must return. We assume that there is no
demand at D and that the depot is always open. For algorithmic reasons, the depot D is
duplicated once for each vehicle. Distances between copies of the depot are set to zero. Let
V = {1, . . . , v} be the set of vehicles, Dk with k ∈V is the virtual copy of the depot from
which vehicle k starts. dij and tij represent respectively the distance and the travel time
along the arc (i, j) ∈A. We assume that tij is directly proportional to dij and that each
vehicle travels at the same speed.
The ﬂeet of vehicles V is heterogeneous. Each vehicle k ∈V is characterized by a speciﬁc
capacity Ck, a service operating time and an incompatibility list. The operating time for
serving client j with vehicle k is deﬁned as ok
j = ck + vkqj, where ck is the constant time
required by vehicle k for setup and post-operations, and vk is the variable time required by
vehicle k to deliver one unit of product. The incompatibility list takes into account that some
vehicles are not allowed or not appropriate to serve some clients. For example, in the case
of an airport, some trucks are too big to serve some small types of aircraft or are prohibited
from delivering fuel to some speciﬁc ﬂights. We also make the assumption that the ﬂeet of
vehicles belongs to the ﬂeet handler. The size of such a ﬂeet cannot vary dynamically with
respect to the demand, and reducing the number of trucks operating simultaneously does
not have a strong impact on the cost structure. We therefore do not attempt to minimize
the number of vehicles in use.
We are concerned by situations where the responsiveness is more critical than the dis-
tance traveled. Responsiveness is deﬁned here as completing a delivery as soon as possible,
within the time window, such that the client or vehicle are able to operate again. Note
that minimizing the arrival time within the time window is not the only way to improve
4


=== PAGE 5 ===
responsiveness. The duration of the service, depending on the vehicle, must also be taken
into account. The global objective to minimize becomes R = P
j sj +ok(j)
j
−aj where sj ≥aj
is the start of service time for client j and where the superscript k(j) is used to express that
a speciﬁc vehicle k is determined by the algorithm to serve client j. By deﬁnition, since the
operating service time is a strictly positive value, so is R. A lower bound can be computed
beforehand. This objective is in contrast to the cost function computed in traditional VRPs
where the goal is to minimize the total distance T = P
(i,j)∈A dijxij (or a related function).
In this last function, xij is a binary variable that indicates if arc (i, j) is traveled in the
solution. Note that, in our context, when two solutions with the same responsiveness are
found, the one with the shortest distance T is preferred.
In the VRP with split deliveries, a single customer can be served by diﬀerent vehicles. The
basic case is one in which the quantities requested by the clients are larger than the capacity
of the vehicles. This can also occur in certain speciﬁc situations when the overall cost is
decreased by splitting the delivery. A typical case is when the remaining capacity of a vehicle
at the end of its trip is no longer large enou