
=== PAGE 1 ===
An Ant Colony System
for Responsive Dynamic Vehicle Routing
M. Schyns ∗
Abstract. We present an algorithm based on an Ant Colony System to deal with a broad
range of Dynamic Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows, (partial)
Split Delivery and Heterogeneous ﬂeets (DVRPTWSD). We address the important case of
responsiveness. Responsiveness is deﬁned here as completing a delivery as soon as possible,
within the time window, such that the client or the vehicle may restart its activities. We
develop an interactive solution to allow dispatchers to take new information into account in
real-time. The algorithm and its parametrization were tested on real and artiﬁcial instances.
We ﬁrst illustrate our approach with a problem submitted by Liege Airport, the 8th biggest
cargo airport in Europe. The goal is to develop a decision system to optimize the journey
of the refueling trucks. We then consider some classical VRP benchmarks with extensions
to the responsiveness context.
Keywords. DVRPTW, heuristics, ant colony system, airport application, responsive-
ness criterion.
1
Introduction
The starting point of this work is a problem submitted by Liege Airport (LGG), the 8th
largest cargo airport in Europe. The goal is to develop a decision system that is able to
optimize the journey of the airport’s refueling trucks. The trucks must deliver a standardized
product, fuel, to aircrafts during predeﬁned time windows corresponding to a sub period of
the time on the ground. There are diﬀerent types of trucks, operating at diﬀerent speeds,
and some of them are not capable of adequately serving certain models of aircraft.
As
is sometimes currently done, a delivery may be split between several trucks under certain
conditions.
In this paper, we give special attention to optimizing a responsiveness objective in a
dynamic environment. Indeed, while minimizing traveled distance is a classical objective
in Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP), the highest priority for an airport is to complete the
deliveries as soon as possible, allowing the aircrafts to return to operations. Airline companies
have to pay for the time spent by aircrafts on the ground. As a result, inactive aircrafts not
only fail to make money, but cost a lot too. Furthermore, ﬂights must satisfy strict schedules
and any delays will lead to ﬁnancial penalties. In the worst cases, take-oﬀor landing slots
may be lost so that the ﬂight has to be rescheduled or canceled. Since unexpected events
may occur at any time, there is a strong reason to not only perform all the jobs in the
allowed time window, but as soon as possible. This responsiveness is also crucial for many
production or service activities in diﬀerent ﬁelds: express parcel deliveries, taxi services, Just
in Time production, express repair services, medical care, petrol station replenishment, etc.
∗QuantOM, HEC Management School, University of Liege, Rue Louvrex 14 (N1), 4000 Li`ege, Belgium.
M.Schyns@ulg.ac.be.
1


=== PAGE 2 ===
The second challenge in this area is the uncertain dynamic environment. An airport
operates continuously seven days a week. There is no clear end of the planning horizon nor
perfect time to start an optimization. Moreover, the airport environment is highly uncer-
tain; ﬂights could be delayed or canceled, for example due to the weather or a breakdown.
Similarly, quantities for fuel deliveries are initially only expectations, which will need to be
tuned at the last moment depending on the load and weather conditions. We develop an
interactive solution to allow dispatchers to take new information into account in real-time.
Our goal is therefore to present an approach to dealing with a broad range of Dynamic
Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows, (partial) Split Delivery and
Heterogeneous ﬂeets, in which this airport refueling problem belongs. Finding the optimal
solution for a real size vehicle routing problem remains a challenge.
VRPs are complex
combinatorial problems, known to be NP-Hard. It is why exact methods in the literature
typically focus on well-deﬁned categories with restricted sets of constraints. This work is
unique in that it simultaneously takes into account all the previously mentioned constraints,
using an ant colony approach. This metaheuristic had already been adapted and proved to
be a good strategy for solving the standard VRP and some extensions. In this research, we
took inspiration from Gambardella et al. (1999) for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time
Windows (VRPTW) and from Montemanni et al. (2005) for the added dynamic dimension.
We illustrate our approach with a speciﬁc instance provided by Liege Airport. We also
test our algorithm on sets of popular VRPTW benchmarks. We start from the work by
Montemanni et al. (2005) and use the same VRPTW datasets in a dynamic context. We also
perform experiments utilizing some Solomon’s benchmarks. We compare diﬀerent dynamic
strategies and the impact of the responsiveness criterion.
Section 2 provides a brief literature review. In section 3, the main components of the
problem are described in further details. In section 4, a classical Ant Colony System (ACS)
algorithm for solving VRPTW is brieﬂy revisited. In section 5, our extensions for addressing
responsiveness and richer problems are described. Next, section 6 contains various strategies
for improving the quality of the results. The results for the Liege Airport case and for the
other benchmarks are presented and commented on section 7. Finally, conclusions are drawn
in the last section.
2
Literature review
The problem under consideration belongs to the family of Vehicle Routing Problems. These
problems are of crucial importance in practice for logistic and supply chain management.
They are also complex combinatorial problems, known to be NP-Hard, which have aroused
the interest of researchers for decades. Laporte (Laporte, 1992, 2009) highlighted the main
contributions since the ﬁrst paper on this topic, written in 1959 by Dantzig and Ramser
(Dantzig and Ramser, 1959). Finding the optimal solution for a real-world problem remains
a challenge. The most common approach in the literature is therefore to focus on simpliﬁed
problems dealing with speciﬁc constraints one at a time. At the opposite, the ﬁrst contri-
bution of our work is to simultaneously integrate a very large set of characteristics so as
to allow companies to easily use our framework for real-life problems. More precisely, we
have simultaneously integrated in our framework the constraints separately studied in the
following VRP subﬁelds: Capacitated VRP (CVRP), VRP with Time Windows (VRPTW)
(see, e.g., Br¨aysy and Gendreau, 2005; Cordeau et al., 2002; Kallehauge et al., 2005), VRP
2


=== PAGE 3 ===
with heterogeneous ﬂeet (see, e.g., Choi and Tcha, 2007; Seixas and Mendes, 2013), VRP
with multi-trips and Split Deliveries (see, e.g.,Archetti and Speranza, 2012; Dror et al., 1994;
Salani and Vacca, 2011). Other constraints for variations like VRP with Backhauls or with
Pickup and Delivery, VRP with multi-depots, Dial-A-Ride Problems are not included in our
approach, even if it would be a natural and possible extension.
A second contribution of our work is linked to the nature of data. One of our main
concerns is the uncertain dynamic environment. Following Ghiani et al. (2003), VRPs may
be classiﬁed along two dimensions: static versus dynamic and deterministic versus stochastic.
A VRP is said to be static if its input data do not depend explicitly on time, otherwise it is
dynamic. A VRP is deterministic if all input data are known when designing vehicle routes,
otherwise it is stochastic. The deterministic static cases are the most studied. Dynamic
stochastic problems, also called real-time problems are more complex and less studied. Our
work belongs to this last category. In this context, uncertain data is revealed during the
course of the operational day and new plans have to be computed or adjusted a