 optimization of the objective function
is achieved through the closeness measure that we redeﬁne as:
ηij =
1
Rij
=
1
sj + ok(j)
j
−aj
where Rij is the marginal responsiveness attached to the move from client i to client j.
A drawback to this measure is that the standard mechanism for determining the next
move can no longer be used as such. In the previous mechanism, the closeness measure is used
without diﬀerentiating between the depot and the clients. In our context, however, the depot
and the clients have diﬀerent structures for the time windows. For the depot, the window
includes the entire planning horizon. Therefore, the depot is always eligible and the related
closeness measure strictly increases with time. The more time goes into the construction
of the path, the more the algorithm would suggest to bring the vehicle back to the depot.
We can easily solve this issue by removing all the depots from the neighborhoods Ni and by
adapting the displacement strategy. Two cases occur. When there are no more clients in Ni,
the only feasible next move is going to the depot (line 11). Otherwise, we may allow, with a
probability of d0 (line 14), the vehicle to go back early to the depot, or, with a probability
of (1 −d0), we may apply the traditional exploitation/exploration mechanism (lines 15-16).
10


=== PAGE 11 ===
d0 is a parameter and could be left at zero to send the vehicles back to the depot only when
truly required. This is the typical strategy in practice in many cases. We suggest here to
allow anticipated returns for two reasons. The ﬁrst is in the context of a multi-trip strategy.
We may hope that a vehicle fully replenished during intermediate periods (when the demand
would be less intense) could be able to serve successively more clients later (during periods
with more intense demand). Second, anticipated returns may allow construction of more
balanced routes. Indeed, within the responsiveness framework, each vehicle is considered
successively for constructing routes. It increases the probability that longer routes, in terms
of number of clients, would be aﬀected to the ﬁrst selected vehicles. The sequence of vehicles
is drawn at random and no vehicle is actually disadvantaged, but the process could still end
with unbalanced routes. Note, however, that the local search described later, based on cross
exchanges, naturally corrects this phenomenon. The anticipated return strategy remains an
option in an attempt to improve the process at the level of the ACS. On the other hand,
requiring the vehicles to come back in advance to the depot may prevent the construction
of unbalanced routes. This question is solved by applying this strategy only to a subset of
ants and by deﬁning a dynamic value of d0. Any static value for d0 could be deﬁned by the
user depending on the problem at hand. We propose a more dynamic strategy. Based on
the ﬁrst multi-trip motivation, sending back a vehicle is senseless if its remaining capacity is
large. We ﬁrst associate d0 with the percentage of emptiness ((Ck −rk)/Ck). Sending back
a vehicle every two moves on average when it is at half capacity would remain excessive. We
next associate d0 with the average number of moves a vehicle would perform before being
empty. With q denoting the average demand, the typical number of moves would be Ck/q.
This leads to our proposal: d0 = q(Ck−rk)
C2
k
.
In connection with the responsiveness criterion, there is another major diﬀerence between
our approach and the traditional one: the size of the ﬂeet. We consider ﬂeets of vehicles
belonging to the operator. The size of such a ﬂeet cannot vary dynamically with respect to the
demand and reducing the number of vehicles operating simultaneously does not have a strong
impact on the cost structure. We therefore don’t try to minimize the number of vehicles in
use. By contrast, an optimal solution in the context of the responsiveness criterion would
naturally put as many vehicles to work as possible . Initializing the algorithm with a realistic
ﬂeet size limit is therefore compulsory. This contrasts with the results obtained when the
criterion is based on the distance and where using fewer vehicles could be a way of reducing
the distances. Note also that the responsiveness objective is not always contradictory to the
minimization of the distances. Short distances imply short travel times, and short travel
times facilitate an arrival at the beginning of the time windows. This becomes even more
signiﬁcant when responsiveness includes the travel time; for example when the beginning of
a time window corresponds to the demand notiﬁcation in the dynamic case. The shortest
route is, however, not guaranteed to be the optimal one. We check this assertion in the
experiments.
5.3
Heterogeneous ﬂeet
The main adaptation of the algorithm for the heterogeneous ﬂeet, beside the deﬁnition of
the closeness measure as a function of ok
j, is done at the level of the neighborhoods Ni
constructions. Before considering the addition of client j to Ni, we must ensure that client
j doesn’t belong to the list of incompatible clients for the vehicle leaving i. The speciﬁc
operating time ok
j also has an indirect impact on the neighborhood construction. Depending
11


=== PAGE 12 ===
on the departure times from each client j, a speciﬁc vehicle k may or may not be able to
reach another client in time. For all three of these components, we need to know which
vehicle is arriving at client j. Since one depot Dk was created as a starting point for each
vehicle k, it suﬃces to check which was the last parking visited by the ant.
When dealing with a heterogeneous ﬂeet, another concern is the allocation process of
the depots during the construction of the route. Until now, the depots were considered
equivalent and it made no diﬀerence for an ant to start or to come back to one or another
depot. This is no longer the case with a heterogeneous ﬂeet. Considering all the depots
successively in one sequence would always favor the same vehicles which is not optimal.
Therefore, to allow full exploration, each vehicle is drawn at random at the beginning of a
new tour (lines 5 and 21).
5.4
Multi-trip
Lots of companies operate continuously seven days a week. The operating day can be long
or even unbounded.
Therefore, the vehicles are allowed to come back to the depot for
replenishment (lines 17-23). The depot is managed as a client to be served and the service
corresponds to the replenishment. A speciﬁc operating time for replenishment, still with
constant and variable parts, is associated to each vehicle (ok
D line 19). After this operation,
the vehicle is available again and can start a new trip to a new client. While in the basic
algorithm the initial departure time from the depot is set to the beginning of the planning
horizon, this can no longer be the case when the same vehicle is allowed to start new trips.
After each replenishment and before a new eventual departure, the initial time associated to
the vehicle must be reset to the time of completion of the last replenishment (lines 19 and
23).
Note that the next vehicle to be considered by default for departure after a replenishment
in Algorithm 1 is drawn at random. Another strategy would be to restart with the vehicle
which was just replenished. This would lead to a more intensive use of the same vehicles and,
in some extreme cases, possibly to a reduction in the number of vehicles operating. In our
context, the ﬂeet belongs to the operator and its size cannot be instantaneously adapted.
Minimizing the number of vehicles on the road does not lead to signiﬁcant beneﬁts since
it has no impact on the ﬁxed costs. Moreover, it could be a counterproductive strategy
when the ﬂeet and the demands are highly heterogeneous. We have therefore integrated a
mechanism in the ACS algorithm to permit the intensiﬁcation of the use of the same vehicles.
When selecting the next Dk as a starting point, the last vehicle used in the current sol